welcome to the program we're going to
start in the US the Senate approved a
$95 billion Aid package for Ukraine
Israel and Taiwan the approval comes
after months of political arguments
Senate Republicans are still divided on
the bill and previously voted it down it
includes $60 billion for ke 14 for
Israel 10 billion for humanitarian Aid
in Conflict zones including Gaza the
bill now heads to the Republican
controlled House of rep Representatives
where we don't know what will happen so
it's not a done deal yet and in the last
hour the US President Joe Biden said
this America can be trusted America can
be relied upon and America stands up for
Freedom we stand strong for our allies
we never bow down to anyone and
certainly not to Vladimir Putin as I've
said before the stakes in this fight
extend far beyond UK Ukraine if we don't
stop Putin's appetite for power and
control in Ukraine he won't limit
himself just to Ukraine and the cost for
America and our allies and partners are
going to rise for republicans in
Congress who think they can oppose
funding for Ukraine and not be held
accountable history is watching history
is watching history is watching failure
to support Ukraine at this critical
moment will never be forgotten
right n as you can see standing by North
America correspondent Nom great to see
you uh let's get to the moments of
history that Joe Biden was just touching
on in a moment but first the
technicalities where does this stand
where are we in this
process well so a flaw vote later four
months later we're finally in this
position where this uh this bill has
been passed by the Senate but as you
mentioned there it's not a done deal
because now it has to go to the house
and the house house is controlled by the
Republicans the Speaker of the House the
Republican Mike Johnson has already
indicated that uh this is going nowhere
um so I mean in terms of what happens
next so um he Mr Johnson has to decide
whether to bring the package to a vote
in the chamber is he going to amend it
and then send it back to the senate or
is he going to ignore it entirely
without getting too much into the weeds
with it if let's just say he decides to
ignore entirely the House Republicans
who did vote for the assistance to to
Ukraine for this this package uh they
could uh join the Democrats in filing a
what's called a discharge petition and
basically that would that's a rare
parliamentary procedure that would
basically circumvent Johnson and then
there'd be a vote but I don't want to
get too much into the weeds with that at
the moment we've got to see uh what
happens next if it goes to the floor it
could take weeks it could take months
before it even lands on President Joe
Biden's desk if at all so okay using
that cliche phrase we'll see what
happens next no no we love getting into
the weeds uh on on this program so I
appreciate that greatly uh let's talk
about the politics of it though from a
kind of step back position what is the
opposition from some to this
package border security uh that's one of
the issues first of all because uh this
is a narrower Bill and uh basically
Republicans particularly those who are
to the very you know right of the party
those who are very closely lined to
Donald Trump they want very strict
border security laws as part of this and
that's that's what you know they have
said that we don't want to pass a
security bill without this the other
thing you've got to remember here is
that Mike Johnson the house uh the
Republican leader the speaker of the
house and many of those Republicans who
are closely lined to Donald Trump who is
likely to be the front runner who is the
front runner and likely to be the
Republican party's presidential
candidate uh they don't want want to
continue supporting Ukraine they just
they they they say they would rather the
money be spent here in the US and so uh
there is this pressure on them for this
bill not to go through now the Speaker
of the House denies that there's that
pressure from uh former president Donald
Trump but that that's some of the
politics that's playing in the
background here Nam thank you so much
for that now it's not just the Politics
as n was talking about their real life
implications we're going to speak now to
Kira rudik who is a member of the
Ukrainian and Parliament leader of the
golos party thank you very much for
coming on the
program hello thank you so much for
having me so what's your reaction to
what's happened there in the Senate and
what potentially could still happen
there in the
US oh well we are very happy that the
process is moving on but it is not final
and I think the toughest uh challenge is
still ahead of us um so basically there
are so many people whose lives
well-being and ability just to exist and
to keep fighting depend on if the
politicians in the United States will
figure out uh and find an agreement and
finding their hearts ability to move
forward uh to keep the promise that the
United States have made you know it is
incredibly hard to explain to people who
are fighting at the front what is going
on and like how did it change from as
long as it takes to
uh it's still four months and we do not
have confirmation for for this Aid okay
can I just ask you about the the the
numbers here $60 billion do heading to
Ukraine if this goes through un amended
give us an idea of what that would be
used
for well it's uh not going to head to
Ukraine there will be 10 billion that
will be used for the aid for our state
so we can cover on the our budget
expenses and the rest will be spent for
the military expenses and mostly they
will be spent inside the United States
to pay for the ammunition to pay for the
missiles to pay for uh additional
manufacturing of the weapons and then at
some point this uh uh these weapons will
go to Ukraine so we are talking right
now about um a really important and
critical project for us because that
will imply having ammunition that we
have a shortage of
uh having their air defense systems
having um different kinds of critical
supplies and um it we we really needed
badly all of that four months ago can
you imagine like what is going on right
now and especially given uh given the
fact that we have no deadline for that
and no uh understanding on when those
missiles and when those weapons will
arrive to Ukraine uh after if the bill
will be passed
and what about the progress I know you
can't draw a direct line from this bit
of money coming through and success or
otherwise on the battlefield of course
but give us an idea on the state of the
military situation now and then if and
when any funding comes what that could
change well I'm not a military expert
but I can tell you couple of things to
have an idea the first one is that while
there are there are those delays in the
support from the United States uh there
are three countries that do not have any
delays in production weapons it's Russia
Iran and North Korea and they are
manufacturing weapons and supplies to
get ahead in ability to attack us and it
is really really dangerous and it was
dangerous last year but right now
they're getting more and more of that
and we see the attacks at the front
intensifying the question is for how how
long our army will be able to hold them
off and this is uh again an existential
question for all of us well the second
sign is that ammunition That was
supposed to be manufactured in Europe is
also delayed so uh we understand that
everybody's trying to help us but we are
paying for every day of this delay with
the lives of our citizens because almost
every night another uh peaceful city of
Ukraine is being attacked ACT people die
lives are destroyed and uh it this
nightmare just continues and continues
and we do not have much to contradict to
that do you have any understanding or
sympathy with the view of some
Republicans in the US that they simply
want money spent in the US for example
on their
border well uh we are talking right now
uh when we talking about the 60 billion
about less than a chunk of percent of
the United States military budget and I
think we as a country have shown that we
can use those money very effectively and
efficiently by weakening Russia and
destroying so many of their forces so
many of their um weapon Supply soldiers
we are the only country in the world who
does not have a fleet but is able to
destroy enemy's Fleet like almost 20% of
that so whatever money are being sent to
Ukraine its money very well spent okay
Kira rudik thank you very much for
coming on the program thank you thank
you and glory to Ukraine